SHIFT2DC T1.6: Pilot of the Expert Elicitation Protocol
Mon, Sep 23, 2024

0:04 - Lucas Pereira
The others easier. It's AIDA, are

0:04 - Carlos Castro
The others are either Blue or AIDA, I don't know how many.

0:31 - Lucas Pereira
I don't know.

0:37 - Lucas Pereira
I don't know.

0:59 - Carlos Castro
in November or something and you choose two or three ships and we do that and also so as not to abuse too much of their patience.

1:09 - Lucas Pereira
If we now want to mark a a workshop here in Madeira of the two projects and we will invite Pramo to be in the other if you can go to the network as they end up playing in the ports.

1:43 - Carlos Castro
That's it from my port, there is availability for that, now it's just a matter of you getting here and talking to us.

1:56 - Lucas Pereira
I don't know why they are asking. I thought everybody could access without invitation, just without having to wait.

2:07 - Carlos Castro
They just want you to click on the button.

2:10 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah, just a few clicks.

2:18 - Carlos Castro
Hello. Hello.

2:21 - Lucas Pereira
Hi. How is the audio for you? Because this room usually makes some echo.

2:28 - Carlos Castro
It's for me. It's okay.

2:29 - Lucas Pereira
Well, okay. Hello. Hello. Hi. Thank you for joining us. So most of us, I think we all know more or less each other with a few exceptions. So we will go. A very short round of interviews. Hello.

2:54 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yes, hello. Hello. Nice to meet you. Thank you for being here.

2:57 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah, you're welcome.

3:15 - Lucas Pereira
Between 10 and 12 people?

3:49 - Lucas Pereira
Hello everyone. Hello.

3:56 - Lucas Pereira
you Our plan is to wait until 20 to 3 in our time, 20 to time, 4 and then we start.

4:41 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Why can't we start now?

4:45 - Lucas Pereira
Since we have quite a few of us, we can go ahead also and start.

4:52 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, because I'm a bit on a tight schedule. I have to leave around 45 minutes into the meeting for actually a personal appointment. I try to stay on by audio, but if we can get kicked off, I think it's good.

5:35 - Lucas Pereira
Just a brief – a lot of you may know why we are here. So this is part of the Shift to DC project. We have a task that's very specific on users and the expertise of end users. And since we are very early in the project we haven't engaged with end users so we decided to look at this from the perspective of the experts in the in the DC systems and we will try to understand for several topics that are reported in the literature what is the opinion of the experts. So we rounded experts from several areas from the ports from the team from buildings from manufacturing from utilities. So everybody here has some expertise in energy and DC that's aligned with the project.

6:37 - Lucas Pereira
So this is the agenda for today so we really don't want to use a lot of time in introductions so I will just go very quickly quickly through everyone, just say the name and where you're from and what you do, which is important for this. And then we just explain briefly the project, the elucidation process. So this is a pilot run, so we will do this again with more people. And the idea here is to get your feedback back on the whole process, but also to get some data, because since you're all experts, your opinions are And this will be reported as well. And then we will have the process and some concluding remarks. So just for the quick introductions, my name is Lucas. I'm from Portugal, from the Technical University of Lisbon. And I'm leading task 1.6. On my right, I'm going to go, and there's Carlos, if you want to quickly introduce yourself.

7:36 - Carlos Castro
Hello, I'm Carlos. I'm an electrical engineer here from APREN, also from Portugal in Madeira. There is one of the demos is here. And I am responsible for all the electrical, electrical disposition of the ports. And we also doing the electrification of the ports for the onshore power for the ships.

8:02 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah. Yobu is here with me. I don't know if you want to say some words. Thank you. Have been with us with this task and I will be providing the support here. Okay, I have Lina next.

8:17 - Lina RUIZ
Okay, thank you. Lina RUIZ from Nexans and so we are involved in many work package and tasks in the Chief2DC project and in particular to provide cable for different demonstrators, so in particular for the building demonstrator.

8:35 - Unidentified Speaker
Great.

8:37 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Salvador here also. Salvador.

8:41 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Yeah. Hi, everyone. My name is Salvador. I'm from Spain, from Tegnalia. Well, my main background is in power electronics or, well, more explicitly, in control of power electronics.

8:53 - Unidentified Speaker
Great.

8:53 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. So we have Katharina. She knows all our tools.

9:03 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Hi. Yes, I'm Katharina. I'm the work package leader of Work Package 3, is the development of all the solutions of the Shift to DC project. And we will be also setting up the DC Living Lab at RWTH Aachen University.

9:25 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Michael?

9:29 - Bartonek, Michael
Yeah, good afternoon. My name is Michael Bartonek. I'm an innovation manager from Eaton here in Vienna, Austria. I have some topics in this project also as me and my team over the last years worked heavily on protection solutions based on power electronics components and also DC. So this is my part here.

10:00 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Thank you very much. We have Johannes. Sorry for my pronunciation.

10:09 - Gehring, Johannes
No problem. That's German. So, of course, I'm Johannes Gehring from Germany, Fraunhofer ISB. As my colleague, Kieran couldn't join the meeting today, so I'm here for him. And I'm focusing on protection devices, mainly on electronic circuit breakers.

10:28 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. I have Dimitrios. Thank you for being here. And Dimitrios helped arrange a lot of the participants here today.

10:37 - Baros, Dimitrios
OK. Hello from my side. My name is Dimitrios Baros. I am from Eton. I am a senior engineer in power electronics from Eton Research Labs in Germany. So I'm here. I'm glad to be here. And by the chance, Lucas, because I from METROSITE, we have two colleagues that joined, Mr. Stamberger and Mr. Bartonek, who joined. You need just one of us, or how it will go?

11:10 - Lucas Pereira
If you can stay, I know that Mr. Hartwig has to leave earlier, so if you all can stay, all your feedback is very welcome.

11:20 - Baros, Dimitrios
Okay.

11:22 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Thank you. And Hartwig, please go if you want to So briefly introduce yourself.

11:28 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, Hartwig Stamberger from Eaton, as mentioned, based in Germany. Electrical engineer by education. I've been involved in DC industry projects for about 10 now with verifying DC installations, low-voltage DC in many applications. And for almost two years now, I'm also the chair board of the Open DC Alliance, as you can see in my background picture.

12:00 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, this is very important for us.

12:02 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yes. I think we've passed the torch to you, so to speak.

12:09 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, exactly. Thank you very much. Now we have Amel.

12:15 - ADDALA Amel
Hi, everyone. So this is Amel speaking from EDF R&D. So I'm project manager within EDF R&D working on power systems and since last year on DC topics.

12:35 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you very much. And finally – not finally. We still have Andrii. Andrii is here also.

12:45 - Colavitto Andrea
Yeah. Hello. Good afternoon. Andrii from Fincantieri SI. We are system integrators of the electric equipment on board the ships, and we are working and supporting the activity of the port demos in order to provide the useful data for the characterization of the port demo.

13:07 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you very much. Now, finally, we have Samy from Water and Well.

13:16 - Samy El Kamch W&W
Hello, everybody. So I'm Samuel Kamsch from Wattenwell in France. I'm leading the DC-DC product developments, mainly for the EV charging applications, and are participating in the Shift to DC project, mainly to provide the V2X charging station, and also a DC-DC converter that will allow the exchange of the energy between two see Michael Grace.

13:48 - Lucas Pereira
Great, thank you. Okay, so just a heads up, so this is the presentation is made also for people mostly that are not in the project, so next I will give an introduction of the project. Here I will be brief because we know more or less the project, but in the next sessions it will be a bit more extended. Okay, so I just did introduction So, this is the shift to DC projects. As you all know, our objective is to, one, establish the guidelines and roadmaps for the widespread adoption of DC solutions, especially medium and low-voltage DC, and we will develop a lot of technologies. We will talk about nine today, but we will develop software tools, simulation tools, hardware solutions like cables, converters. And we will demonstrate them in four industrial – four domains that were carefully selected by the commission.

14:50 - Unidentified Speaker
Okay?

14:52 - Lucas Pereira
So this is just a very good image of the project that tells how we are organizing ourselves. So we are starting – this is what we are doing mostly now, is an overview of DC grids. We are also working on The tools in the middle, we have the design of the IT solutions, architectures. Then we are developing a lot of prototypes. Some have very high DRLs that we will see next. And then some simulation tools. All this will be simulated in four demos. We are actually in the proposal only to where required, but we are looking at the four at different levels, the data centers, buildings, industry and ports. This will be followed by a lot of feasibility studies recommendations. This is why we have a lot of experts in the consortium. And then the exploitation and the participation in a lot of events, including bridge conferences and, for example, we will participate in SIREDS in Chicago in November to present the ports aspects. Okay, so I think everybody knows more or less So, like I said, the project will develop 30 solutions between software, business models, hardware. But here, we selected nine that are more generic. And when we do this experiment focusing on the demos, we will select other tools, okay? So, we divided these tools in three categories. Materials, which are the DC cables and DC connectors. That will be developed protections because and I'm glad we have an expert here in protections because it's a very critical aspect in DC systems is the actual and there's a lot of misconceptions about protections and then devices and tools which we will develop.

16:50 - Stammberger, Hartwig
When you talk about protection what is your difference between static based and semiconductor based? I don't understand that.

16:58 - Lucas Pereira
This is the tools that we have our briefly explain now what each tool that will be developed.

17:05 - Unidentified Speaker
Okay, good.

17:09 - Lucas Pereira
Thanks. No problem. So, then we will ask a few questions. The questions and discussion will be around these technologies and the demos. Okay, so the first one is the DC cables that Lina is here as a representative of Nexans and KDE is to develop new cables that are well or that are really designed for the DC solutions. Not just a cable but a sustainable cable that does not age as fast as the others and with ergonomics that we can use the cable more or less as we use a normal AC cable. We're also developing DC connectors which is the idea is to enable the connection of the components to the loads and the grid. This is important, especially for the safety issues. Something that in AC is very straightforward here is a bit more complex. The second part is the protection. The static protection systems. So the idea is that we have a system that quickly isolates read when there are faults.

18:27 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Excuse me again, can you just go back one slide? The DC cables, you say they conform to Covent OS specifications.

18:44 - Stammberger, Hartwig
To my knowledge, and I've looked at the Covent OS system specification, there's not even a chapter on cables there. How come that is in there?

18:57 - Lina RUIZ
Sorry, you can repeat the question, please. It was not clear for me.

19:03 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Well, like it says here that the DC cables will perform to current OS specifications. Of course. However, in the current OS system specification, there's not even a chapter on cables.

19:19 - Lina RUIZ
It's on the construction. So that is today, I don't know if you know this information, but there is a working group on cable requirement, more specifically, working on that today. And it's for the reason it's proposed in the future will conform with the specification in this case. And in particular, because this cable will be used and implemented for building application, which is the focus on that in this case. So I don't know if the point is clear now.

20:00 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Thanks for outlining this. May I suggest to add that there is already a well-researched and well-funded description on cables DC industry and Open DC Alliance system document that has been publicly available for two years now. We've had cable manufacturers, a couple of them, as well as many connector manufacturers. That is where the expertise is in all modesty.

20:41 - Lina RUIZ
But in my understanding, it's focused on application, there is not the same kind of requirement. I don't know, for example, if you take an example concerning, I don't know, fire condition and so on, there is not the same kind of requirement, but of course the research performer during ODCA experience and activities, we are, we study I did that. We considered that. Yeah, in different discussion and different deliverable of the Chief RDC project also.

21:20 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, I understand that requirements are different in buildings, but this is DC cables. It doesn't say DC cables for buildings or for residential applications. That's why I'm putting that there. And ask for inclusion of We don't have to replicate what has already been done.

21:44 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah. I will clarify this in the next section.

21:51 - Bartonek, Michael
I think it's worth clarifying. In the current OS, second version of the system reference documents in the appendix, there are some cables specified depending the zone where you are in yeah but nothing nothing more yeah it's just yeah yeah there is no information regarding

22:19 - Lina RUIZ
the insulation for example but more if it's a bipolar or monopolar architecture and what kind of other for example the intertripping wire and so on.

22:30 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah well okay thanks I've looked at the most most recent document but it Anyway, we don't have to go into detail here.

22:40 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. It's important. It's important feedback, because to fine-tune the presentation. Yeah. Also. OK. So moving forward. So we have also those protection systems. We are developing the static protection systems, semiconductor-based circuit breakers, and then a tool, a software tool, specific to design such protection systems and to and to test this protection system. So this is being designed because there's no or at least white, no well known tools for this in DC systems.

23:21 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Also, so this is the system in this semiconductor is a device. Is that how you kind of distinguish?

23:33 - Lucas Pereira
Yes. One is a device. Okay, we will ask them questions about these technologies and their importance and their feasibility. Then we have the tools, devices and tools. We have a DC-DC converter or distribution unit that will be developed by our partners. Also an LVAC low voltage AC and low voltage DC interlink converter. It will also be developed to make the interface between the DC and DC world. We also measure, developed on a part with the DC measuring device. So their idea is retrofitable and trustable. So the idea is to create several measuring devices and then combine all the measurements like an ensemble. Such that we can create a device that is robust to noise and that does not require a lot of calibration on the client side. Finally, another one is the DC solutions design tool. There are a lot of solutions for AC to simulate DC grids, not so much for DC, and this is one of the tools that we are developing in the Okay, so this is nine of the 30 tools that we will develop.

25:03 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Okay, again, like for the last topic, there's a design tool. Are you aware of the DSIDE software?

25:15 - Lucas Pereira
It's a tool to design the ADC solution. Yes. Like it's inspired and that will integrate tools such as Optimal Power Flow, simulations and components that we can integrate, DC cables.

25:32 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, yeah. Like this D-side tool from the direct energy partners is very advanced already, I guess, as far as I've seen.

25:47 - ADDALA Amel
Yeah. Yes. Hello, this is Emil speaking from EDF. In fact, I we are we are leading as EDF this the design of this tool and we already we are already in contact with the decide I I tried to reach this this company to discuss with them about their tool because in fact as you say this tool is very advanced and is suggesting is proposing these features we are looking for The problem is that this tool is not open source. And we have agreed to have not necessarily open source tools for protection, for transient simulation, but I don't know. For me, the design tool is something basic and something that has to promote DC technologies. So if we start with something that we have to pay for, this is not going to promote DC projects. But in fact, as you say, we have discovered this tool and it's exactly having these exact features.

27:11 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah. It's kind of a balance. How much can we within the project realistically develop to more or less make publicly available what they have done? Just a thing to consider.

27:34 - Stammberger, Hartwig
There are, as far as I understand, you can design at least a few projects on your own. A colleague of mine has done that. Which is freely available?

27:46 - ADDALA Amel
Yes, I think, yeah, a couple of simulations, you can access, you can have access to a couple of simulations.

27:56 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah. Thank you very much. It's important to know that there are several solutions already being developed. Yes. Okay, so briefly, the demonstrators, again, During the actual session, we will go in more details. So we have four demonstrators, a data center, which will be in Germany, where we want to look at mostly edge data centers and how can DC be integrated there, especially from a perspective of integrating renewables and heat reuse, and if we can have the office also powered by DC, not just the actual computer. We have a building, a residential building demonstrator in France, where we want to see how all these technologies that are already DC can be integrated into a DC grid. We have industry, two use cases in industry, one in manufacturing, where we want to test actually also integration of renewables in this manufacturing industry, and a live access by the living lab in Germany, in Aachen, where we want to integrate all these technologies and actually connect to large facilities. And finally, we have the ports, the port here in Funchal, where we want to see to what extent the sea can be an option for onshore power supply. There are several open issues. One of the most critical is people talk a lot of the difference in frequency of the vessels that 50 60 hertz dc could be a very interesting alternative here but not just that even to power the operations of the ports like the forklifts and the cars electric vehicles if this can be used using a dc microgrid so this will be a digital twin demonstrator so it's more on a simulation hardware in the loop. Okay, so just to tell you why are you here, I already said in the beginning, so we want to do this expert. So we have a lot of experts and our goal is to gain insights. So already we have gained insights even without starting the licitation process. So the idea here is We will now make a few questions, and we will ask for your answers, either for qualitative and for quantitative data.

30:39 - Lucas Pereira
Just a few notes. So this is done especially because, like I said in the beginning, right now there are not a lot of DC users, so we are still in the early phase of the demos. We don't have anything to show, so let's go with experts also because there's a lot of still uncertainty in these fields a lot of mixed feelings or the literature is is not so fast also so it's important that we can bring together experts and talk about a few aspects so we selected some very specific aspects like the barriers to adoption costs time risks of delay some general discussions which is what we are already have. So how will we do this? There are two ways, two types of tools. One will be using Slido. I don't know if you guys and for this we said that you should have a cell phone or a second screen available with data and the Slido we will show the questions and you will answer the questions and in real time we'll show the answers and discuss about the most relevant aspects, depending on how the answers distribute. And also, we also have by raising hands if we want to discuss something extra. So I don't know if everyone has a cell phone.

32:11 - Lucas Pereira
I would start. One important thing is Once you join this Slido, if you read this QR code, you won't have to read it again. All the questions will be automatically switched from one to the other, okay? If you can join So the first question is just for us to get acquainted with the tool. We have five people connected.

33:01 - Stammberger, Hartwig
We have to register or something? I just see the yes slide and I said send.

33:12 - Lucas Pereira
no you just have to yes no you have to select one answer and click send yeah okay no need to register so we have seven so we should have many participants one two three four should have at least Okay we have everyone answered. So this is how it works. Of course everyone is ready to start which is good.

34:04 - Lucas Pereira
process will be, and then we have to raise hands. This is being recorded because then we're going to use these tools to extract also the qualitative information. Okay, so now we will start the expert solicitation. So the first two questions are related to the feasibility and importance of the demos, of the four demos, the sites, using DC technologies in ports, industry, buildings and in data centers. And there are two questions and these options are not important, so much important, important, very important and not able to respond. Okay. The question should now be.

34:51 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, the question should be in your cell phones.

35:10 - Stammberger, Hartwig
I wonder if someone says it's not important.

35:14 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah, this will be interesting. This is.

35:24 - Lucas Pereira
I have the answers, so we have seven so far. So far, very important, it's leading on importance.

35:36 - Lucas Pereira
And unpredictability is a bit more balanced. I think we are only missing one answer.

35:51 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, there's one participant. Not responding. Okay. You have all the answers. So feasible, nine, two that are very feasible. So I don't know if someone wants to comment on the very feasible. People that say very feasible are more confident. The good news is that it's feasible. So people think it's very feasible.

36:28 - Lucas Pereira
Importance of 9.1.1. There's one somewhat important. I don't know if we want to comment on this. We don't know who would give the answers, to be honest. So the answers are anonymous. It's interesting. Maybe this also depends on the demos. Because maybe not all the demos have the same level of importance. Yeah, since it's four different sectors. Exactly. So what we think is that in the next session when we do it specific for each demo it should be also will help – us also understand and then compare the results. Okay, thank you for Hi, Andrii. You already started? Sorry for coming late. I've had another meeting that took too much time. Oh, it's OK. So we are answering some questions. You are happy to, you know, the project. Everything's until now, you know. We will just send through chat. Yes, it was just send it through the chat, the code for you to join. The slide on. Okay, so the next three questions are on the solutions that we've presented and we want to see how important they are. We are not asking about visibility because we are developing them is because we think they are feasible. But it's mostly about importance. We will start with materials because where we have the cables and the connectors. And I think you should be seeing now the questions for the cables. So this takes a little bit to load.

38:39 - Lucas Pereira
But you should be seeing it now.

38:50 - Stammberger, Hartwig
I see the question about the cables, like, what do you mean about sustainable cables? Why are DC connectors not sustainable?

39:02 - Lucas Pereira
That's a very good question. That's a very good point. Yeah, they should be also, both should be sustainable. The cables will more on, because there's a specific care with the materials to use more sustainable materials.

39:18 - Lina RUIZ
Yeah, exactly. That's the point. The idea is because there is no current, there is no standard, you know, so we have some room anywhere to perform better in some formulation by taking into consideration better materials, improved materials, and that's the point of work. And at the same time, you are able to introduce some optimization in the design in terms of saving raw materials. Concept are will be implemented.

39:47 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, simply by using DC instead of AC like we need less, right?

39:56 - Lucas Pereira
Can I ask this about materials?

40:11 - Lucas Pereira
Same questions about the protections that the three tools that we previously about the... Protections.

40:42 - Lucas Pereira
F12 answers for the protections. Okay, so here are There's a very good... So I think we had a glitch here. It skipped the answers on the previous. So on the cables, we had nine very important and three important. So I think there's the connectors. And in the cables we have somewhat important, four important and one very important. I would like to hear a little bit about the cables, why wouldn't, because we have this somewhat important, there is some, because I would say because we can go, we can still do the systems without them, right? As of today.

42:12 - Lucas Pereira
Probably it's better to have these cables, but if we don't have these cables, we can still work it out.

42:21 - Stammberger, Hartwig
In the end, we do need DC cables. If we want to design anything that any type of extension.

42:34 - Stammberger, Hartwig
And there are DC cables available, it's not that we have to invent them.

42:39 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, thank you. This is what I thought, and it makes sense. Okay, for the others, so the static protection systems, I think we have an agreement, it's very important. Are important. For the semiconductors, everyone agrees on that. Very important. And on the design tools, there's a mixed 8-4. Still important, but I would say it's still not the same as above. We can still develop systems, and we will still be able to Do the work or there are any tools available that can help us with this? Anyone that has answered?

43:37 - Stammberger, Hartwig
I answered important because I don't know. I don't think this is the primary task of this. On this project, given that there are other players there that work on that. However, in overall, if I had to answer that question, in that respect, I'd say it's very important because that is the hurdle why people don't do it.

44:01 - Bartonek, Michael
Right. And the design of a DC system is quite different compared to an AC system. That's why if we do not have the right design tools on hand, for sure, later on, it's not, and for sure, This is not the biggest topic, the biggest problem here. We just have to do it. But in the end, if we think about commercialization, for sure, it will never work without the appropriate design tool. That's for sure.

44:30 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you very much. I think the answers are a bit also aligned with the state of the art where we are standing on now. Next one is about the devices and tools. There will be four options the same.

44:56 - Lucas Pereira
that this measurement.

45:24 - Stammberger, Hartwig
What is the third question? Energy router.

45:30 - Lucas Pereira
It's, uh.

45:34 - ADDALA Amel
The internal converter.

45:36 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah. Oh, obviously to advocacy. We forgot to update here. The name that we have on the

45:47 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Okay, so it's just like the active in-feed converter, interlink converter, just a different name. Yes. All right.

45:56 - Unidentified Speaker
Okay.

46:05 - Stammberger, Hartwig
And the fourth question, DC solutions design tool. It's the same question as before. Is that a trick to find out if we This was good, Hartwig.

46:15 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah.

46:19 - Lucas Pereira
This is the general design. Okay.

46:22 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah.

46:25 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Okay.

46:25 - Unidentified Speaker
Good. Understood.

46:26 - Bartonek, Michael
Well, we have all the answers.

46:33 - Lucas Pereira
Let's see the results.

46:40 - Lucas Pereira
For some reason it jumped. It won't show the results.

46:53 - Lucas Pereira
Sorry, it's not showing. This is why we're piloting this because a lot of things are not working. Okay, here are the answers.

47:04 - Lucas Pereira
Important, very important. I think this is have to do with the previous discussions that we had. They are important, but there are already some tools, not open source. But if at some point we want to make this commercial, these tools are all very important to have these tools working. If anyone wants to add something about the converters, it's also very important I think there's also general consensus.

48:02 - Lucas Pereira
The energy router also somewhat general consensus about the tool. I don't know if there's anything you want to add. Next, we will move to barriers of adoption.

48:23 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, great. So the next question is a bit different. We went to the literature and we found some discussion about barriers for adoption and we selected 11 of them and now we are asking you to select the top five. We doubt it. When you select it's not like One is more than the other is like the five that you think are more important from all these options here They will be shown in the If you can see all of them, yeah Well, like I said It's top five. They are all ranked equally here in this exercise sense. Thank you.

50:18 - Lucas Pereira
This one is taking a bit longer as expected because it's. It's a lot of things.

50:25 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, but it's a good collection.

50:28 - Lucas Pereira
Yes. And there's probably more.

50:33 - Katharina Hetzenecker
But I would, I think for the next round of this questionnaire, I would separate the safety issues from power losses and quality.

50:48 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, I'll make them the two separate.

50:50 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Maybe because, um, for example, if you have like, um, protection issues with finding protection concept, that's safety concern. And that would be like,

51:06 - Katharina Hetzenecker
So yeah, some would separate separated from power quality, which is normally higher in DC systems than AC systems, for example.

51:16 - Lucas Pereira
Yes. And the safety should be alone.

51:20 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah, that's a good point.

51:23 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, thank you. Yeah, this is very good. You have ten answers. We will also in the next try to put them more in categories. Maybe it's easier to see all the options.

51:43 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, I think we have all the answers now. Okay, so one that dominated was lack of enough trained personnel in these systems. It's very interesting. It's very often disregarded in the literature, but in one of the first meetings we had of this project for this task, I remember it was one of the topics that was raised by our colleagues. Even more than the costs.

52:25 - Lucas Pereira
We have a follow-up question which is actually on how do we think we can improve this. The high cost is the second. Third is uncertainty. Then we have a lot of which is interesting also. The utility interaction, misconception, certainty of regulatory roadmaps, there's a lot of questions that have the same amount of answers. Interestingly, lack of pilot projects has less answers, and the ones is reduced reliability in DC devices. I believe this one is because we are all experts, so we know a lot about this and the reliability. I would expect that if we do this, we want to do this with end users, we should have very different type of answers. I don't know if anyone wants to comment on these results, something that you think is interesting here.

53:28 - Stammberger, Hartwig
I'm surprised that the cost is so so high up there.

53:40 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Because to get to the cost, you need to be able to have the expertise to lay out a system and know about it. But this is...

53:56 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Yeah, but for example, sorry, but for example, Hardwick, I chose the high costs of these solutions as barriers because we will, or DC technology, the adoption of DC technology will also depend on early adopters which will build more demo sites or create their own or realize their own DC projects without the standards being totally ready and without, for example, insurance companies being totally on board. And for that to happen, you need a working cost-benefit analysis, which is hindered by DC products that are still too costly, too pricey, because they are not produced on such a large scale.

54:59 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Yeah yeah it is it is a valid point uh I'm just yeah anyway it's it's all good um actually I have to jump out of this meeting now I'll try to listen in on my phone um but I'll uh unfortunately have to leave now so is there going to be a follow-up?

55:22 - Lucas Pereira
Yes we'll show the results yeah yes the meeting and we will run follow-up meetings. We will run follow-up sessions on the specific demos provided we get experts for the demos.

55:37 - Stammberger, Hartwig
Okay, thank you very much.

55:44 - Lucas Pereira
So let's move to the next question.

55:51 - Lucas Pereira
Is that if there's any other so we listed 11 could be 12 if you think there's something else that is not listed and this is a cloud base so you just have to write down whatever you think is not listed and should be here Protection. And also the effect.

56:47 - Lucas Pereira
technology as such. So what would be the this new technology will be thinking it would be this like normally we have early adopters of technology and they would be fine with using others will be less keen on using it would it be related to this?

57:10 - Bartonek, Michael
Yeah what I had in mind here is as we're entering a new kind of protection technology, as we are moving into the power electronics based solution, this is completely new for this area. And this might be an obstacle when it comes to decide, should I rely on the already proven decades old technology for protection and step into this new technology? Could be one topic which could create some headaches, for sure.

57:49 - Lucas Pereira
That's a very good point. Yes, it's already working. Why should we change? So we have one here that I would ask help TCO comparison. If you can help us with this, TCO.

58:07 - Colavitto Andrea
Yeah, sorry. Total cost of ownership. A comparative zone between the two solutions in a more comprehensive scenario. So not only the installation costs, but also the cost of operation and so on, in order to compare the two technologies in a longer range of time.

58:32 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, great. Thank you.

58:34 - Lina RUIZ
Yeah, just to interrupt something, fully agree with the last point mentioned, One problem when we compare is the comparison is not at the same level. The advantage offered by the DC microgrid are not compared real to the AC grid standard. It's just compared to standard or traditional AC installation, and that's not the point. So I think there is probably a point to propose a method to compare the real performances, A very good question.

59:12 - Lucas Pereira
It's a transversal issue in most of technology developments to fair comparisons, meaningful comparisons. An interesting one here which says clients. We are not talking about clients. I don't know if you want to say something about the clients.

59:34 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Yeah, maybe, yeah, yeah, I use the word client, but maybe I was thinking on end users. Basically, what I wanted to say here is that, okay, sometimes, even in my case, it is difficult, I mean, when you read about this technology, there are a lot of information of general advantages of the use of that technology, right? Better utilization of the cables, less number of that you have in mind. Higher conversions, higher efficiency and so on. But these are kind of very general. Imagine that you have in mind a project. It happens to me. Imagine that I'm working in a research center. At some point, we were discussing about using these technologies in our building, in some parts of our buildings. It is very difficult for us the advantages, the real advantages that brings the technology to our case without making very detailed studies. Because if you have to make a lot of very detailed studies, I mean, okay, this brings a lot of, this takes a lot of time or you need to hire a company to do that. And so for me, there's a little bit of lack of information about the real advantages that this technology in real scenarios.

1:01:02 - Lucas Pereira
I think it aligns with this nuclear incentive to use it. It's not clear what is the clear advantage and the incentives to actually use these technologies.

1:01:17 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Yeah, because there are a lot of quite a lot of general information, but I don't know if this information is always applicable or not or you know.

1:01:27 - Lucas Pereira
Exactly.

1:01:31 - Lucas Pereira
I would say that in some even for us inside the project in some of the demos it looks more obvious than in the others right. For example me personally I think I see the data center is a clear case support We are still trying to figure out the onshore power supply, and we are already talking about DC. It's like we are trying to give a step that is higher than our legs, like we are trying to leapfrog. And I think this is also my perspective. I don't know if anyone wants to add something here.

1:02:16 - Lucas Pereira
As we can move to the next questions.

1:02:33 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, now it's costs, as we saw, cost was highly ranked very so we have a follow-up question so we guessed that cost would be there because in the literature is probably the most mentioned one so we will ask for the solutions that we were that we presented so the what we will be shown is for each solution how critical would be the cost of this if you cannot bring the cost down how critical it will be for the actually large-scale deployment of these systems.

1:03:17 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Sorry, Lucas, but are you referring to cost now, as Katharina was saying before, or cost once the technology is developed and you can suppose a massive use of the technology?

1:03:32 - Lucas Pereira
Talking about the cost, not when it's fully developed, because should be a bit lower but in the first until we start to get some traction on the technology but that's a good point we should add this to the to

1:03:48 - Carlos Castro
the questionnaire the cost the costs will only go down when there is a massification of the technology yeah so when you have loads of companies doing the same thing until then you will always have the cost will always be

1:04:02 - ADDALA Amel
high exactly Yes but the massification cannot be reached if you don't have a market and industry investors they invest when they feel that there is a market so this is always related.

1:04:22 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah this is a challenging topic because there's we all know cost is normally an engineering problem if we get the materials but even if Engineers can find ways to lower the cost. If there's no markets, the cost will still be high. So it's a very interesting trade-off. Okay.

1:04:48 - Lucas Pereira
We will update the question for the next polls. So now we should have 11 answers, not 12.

1:05:00 - Lucas Pereira
cost. We should state the cost at which stage. Katharina, please go ahead.

1:05:05 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Yes, actually the cost of the DC cable totally depends on the application that we want to use it for. So, yeah.

1:05:16 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, that's a very good point that we didn't consider here. We are considering the whole four demo You think the importance will also depend on the application, the importance of the cost?

1:05:37 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Yes, because it depends on how much cable I need. That was the point that I'm targeting at.

1:05:45 - Lucas Pereira
Okay.

1:05:57 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, so this is interesting. This is what we like, So this is like moderate versus critical. Okay, so it really depends on the application. I don't know if this has something to do with it, with the answers. I don't know if someone that responded. So I said moderate. I don't know if someone else that responded critical would want to say something about the answer or moderate, someone else that said moderate. I said moderate based on the previous discussions that we had, that we already have some cables.

1:06:50 - Carlos Castro
We are in a big project here. Doing the electrification of the ports. And it's not in DC, it's in AC, but we have about seven kilometers of cable to put in. And it's a giant cost. That's why I put it in the critical range. And when we're talking about massive quantities of energy, the price will always because of the material and such.

1:07:22 - Lucas Pereira
Someone that had answered moderate, I would like to hear your feedback.

1:07:29 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Yeah, so basically I answered moderate, but same as you, Lucas, based on the previous discussion that we have. In any case, I have to say that because, I mean, the difference between moderate and critical is just one stage. Maybe, I mean, if you read the name moderate and critical, it's a big difference but in fact it's the one following the other so maybe the difference is not so big, right?

1:07:51 - Lucas Pereira
We should add something in between moderate and critical.

1:07:54 - 1Katharina Hetzenecker
Yeah, maybe it could be.

1:07:59 - Katharina Hetzenecker
And actually, I'm now wondering, Lina, for what time of, for what lifespan do you create the DC cable? Like, do you have a target that you want to reach? Because for AC cables, for example, we invest one time and then we expect a lifespan of like 30 to 40 years.

1:08:25 - Lina RUIZ
Yeah, the idea is to keep the same performance in terms of lifespan compared to AC, that's sure.

1:08:33 - Katharina Hetzenecker
And do you do investigations?

1:08:35 - Lina RUIZ
You were previously referring to thermal aging of the insulation and I Of course, because the behavior under DC constraint is not the same for different kind of insulation, okay, compared to AC, for example, if we take PVC or XLPE, in the comparison, the behavior is not the same. So, yeah, it's, but the idea in terms of, I cannot say if the word that's right, the warranty, insurance, and so on, it's to have the same kind of performance. Of course, if we have better, but that's a great point. But at least in terms of performance, it's the point.

1:09:22 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you very much. Let's go for the second solution. Thank you. Here is more critical.

1:09:34 - Lina RUIZ
Sorry, I take note of the comment, because it's great to know – to have more feedback regarding this point, because just to complete something mentioned – somebody mentioned something about, yeah, length of the cable in different application or in different installation. But the point also is also to check what is possible in terms of copper, aluminum, you know, because, yeah, cost will be higher according to what kind of conductor we perform. Use sorry we deployed and yeah it's a point also to be checked when we speak about costs.

1:10:14 - Lucas Pereira
The actual material okay for the DC connectors critical the answers 50% moderate I don't see a very big discussion here I think it's important to have the connectors unless someone wants to add something here. We can move to the next question.

1:10:43 - Lucas Pereira
So the next is about the protections. So it's the same question for the three solutions that we have around the protections. The static protection system, the semiconductor-based and that too.

1:12:11 - Lucas Pereira
This is us.

1:12:39 - Lucas Pereira
time would also be a good indicator of the of the questions. Okay we have 13 answers. Okay so for static protections I would say 10 out of 13 are on the critical, three on the moderate. I would like to hear something about moderate. Who answered moderate? Yes, please.

1:13:08 - Katharina Hetzenecker
I chose it because in my imagination, this is a technology that I purchased one time. I purchased the knowledge on how to do this for my project, for example. So given that my DC installation will run tens of years, I put moderate.

1:13:40 - Lucas Pereira
It's related to the one-time acquisition. For a lot of years the cost dissipates in time. And Carlos?

1:13:52 - 1Carlos Castro
I put moderate also because anything to do with security reasons. I believe the price won't be greatly affected. The cost won't be a problem. And also because like Katharina said, normally it's in the installation that you purchase these equipments. And after it, the costs will, after the years that they are working, the cost won't be so high.

1:14:19 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Set of points. And now someone else can move to the next, which is the semiconductor it's more or less the same. I don't know if the model right here would be for the same reasons or if there are other reasons or if we can say if we can keep the same answers from a previous if they would apply here. Okay. Okay. Still, it's more than half. Okay. So the next one is the tool, which is moderate. This is very interesting.

1:15:22 - Lucas Pereira
I think we already discussed the importance of the tools. We will need them eventually, but we can go without them. Would this, also because we're talking about the cost, would this be because even if it's expensive, we can go open source? Would there be something that you would like to add? For taking its moderates?

1:15:55 - Lina RUIZ
Yeah, I don't know, but since the DC design tool probably in coming future will be something like a future of extensive design tool in general, because in term of the cohabitation AC and will be also going to live together. So I think it will be more than a future than a final design tool. I don't know, it's just my opinion. So I consider that the cost will be moderated because it will be a commercial tool. But of course, at this stage, it's not the case. But yeah, I think it's just a future, component of the wall design tool.

1:16:49 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. Yes, we have a question about time, which will be interesting to see the answers. So let's move in the interest of time. I think we can try to go to the next one. It's about the devices and tools.

1:17:03 - Lucas Pereira
Talking about the shear measurement device, the converters, the energy router, and again, the DC solutions design tool.

1:18:06 - Unidentified Speaker
OK.

1:18:07 - Lucas Pereira
We have 10 answers so far.

1:18:14 - Lucas Pereira
Okay. I'm not showing the answers in real time to avoid biases. So once we have all the answers, I will. Okay.

1:18:39 - Lucas Pereira
Okay it's moderate for this measurement device. I think we understand why. My assumption is you will have to have it at some point so and this is one the costs will probably come down with time much easily.

1:18:58 - Andrii Chub
But I guess we will not use too many of them probably so they will not define cost of the whole system.

1:19:06 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you. That's very good input.

1:19:14 - Lucas Pereira
So the DC converters, this is interesting. I was expecting this to be on the critical because I've been hearing it's very expensive to do the conversion in DC. It's much more expensive than in AC.

1:19:32 - Andrii Chub
I wouldn't say so. Get-off-the-shelf with power electronic has 10 cents per watt or less and the technology is mature and if you have a scale it will be cheap Okay The energy router this is a bit more critical.

1:19:54 - Lucas Pereira
I don't know if you want to add something around this So this is probably more important because this is the interface between the two worlds and then probably will be more expensive.

1:20:10 - Andrii Chub
Your system may not have too many DC-DC converters, but it will have interlinking converters at some point. And I guess that also cost depends on how much services you want to provide. If you want to be capable of providing more services to the grid, you may want to overrate it. And this is where cost will be prohibited. In my opinion.

1:20:33 - Lucas Pereira
Exactly. That's a very good point that we are also looking at it. We are looking at the services to provide to the grid and we are kind of ignoring that there's this in between this conversion price that we have to put. Yeah, very interesting and interesting.

1:20:50 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
At the end, as far as I understand, you pay for the hardware. You almost don't pay anything for the software later on. So I would say that definitely, from my point of view, DC-DC converters and AC-DC converters are critical elements for the development of DC solutions. To be honest, in terms of cost, in terms of impact, the cost of power electronics is always going down, down, and the technology gets mature. So I don't think it is going to – the cost of these two converters or these two types of converters are going to be very, very critical for the development of the solutions. Maybe today it is, but in the short future I would say that the cost is not going to be very critical because I was saying always go down, down, down.

1:21:41 - Lucas Pereira
Okay. Thank you. The next is about the solution. It's moderate. I think it's more or less expected. Like I said, there are already solutions. This will be open source, especially if it's an open source solution, then the cost here is a bit different. I don't know if someone else wants to add. If not, we can move to the next question.

1:22:13 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, so I don't know if, so this here is if you want to, any barriers, something that we want to add here. This would be the opportunity. What do you think? We talked about the barriers. We talked about, we've heard a lot about what will make the cost come down, which is evolution of the technology, microelectronics. What would be a barrier for the cost not to come down? Would be the...

1:22:51 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Well, for me, it is very important here, and it is a topic that it seems that it is completely unrelated, but the standardization. One, the standards are clear. I mean, manufacturers, designers know what they have to do, and this, again, is going to bring the cost down. If this is not clear, you are always making different, not prototypes, but different products without...

1:23:16 - Unidentified Speaker
Exactly.

1:23:20 - Andrii Chub
I fully support Salvador because this is all about economy of scale but industry will not jump into economy of scale if rules are undefined.

1:23:31 - Lucas Pereira
So the standards is something that we should also have in the barriers. Okay thank you very much. So the next question It's exactly related to this. Which conditions could support positively the cost of improvements? I think we are answering them already which is the evolution of the markets and the standards. If we have standards this will really help actually make things make the markets adopted much faster. Okay so now it's about what adoption, so this question is we want to know for the solutions when we will see the widespread adoption. So we have a very wide range of dates, okay? By widespread adoption we mean it's already in the markets and being used as AC is used today, okay? So the first is for the materials. Thanks.

1:25:31 - Lucas Pereira
We are also taking, we are looking at the time to see how much, how long the other sessions will last. Okay, so this is something we're also looking at. So we have 12 answers, 13. Thank you very much.

1:26:11 - Lucas Pereira
2030 so it's very soon but so we are very optimistic like by the end of 2000 the 2020s or 2030 it should be there for the DC connectors is until the end of the decade is a bit different but more or less aligned so I think there's optimism I think this would be because we need them for the solutions.

1:26:45 - Andrii Chub
But actually it is a strange result because half of the people told it rather soon, half of the people told it far away.

1:26:51 - Unidentified Speaker
Yeah.

1:26:56 - Andrii Chub
Because for me it is soon because I can go to, I don't know, Digikey and buy this Arc Zero from Infineon, sorry, from Phoenix Contact and they're already coming to the market. As far as I'm concerned.

1:27:13 - Lucas Pereira
Is it something that you can buy easily?

1:27:19 - Andrii Chub
Yeah, you can buy off the shelf. You can buy for telecom GS21 for 3 kilowatt. You can buy Arc Zero from Phoenix. I'm not discussing the price. It's not that cheap, but they're already on the market and available. And also like DC charging. I think this is a DC connector that many of us are using.

1:27:41 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah, something people that think that the white would be 2040 like adding another almost 20 to it. I don't know if someone wants to add something about this 2040. Otherwise.

1:28:02 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, move to the next question, which is for the protections. Okay.

1:28:59 - Lucas Pereira
Sometimes the doors of course.

1:29:48 - Lucas Pereira
It's very balanced again. I think this is interesting. Maybe we'll have to reframe this question. Maybe it's a problem of the question. I don't know if you guys have some input on this.

1:30:04 - Katharina Hetzenecker
Yes, maybe it needs to be clarified at the beginning of the presentation what exactly a static protection system is. So I would suggest to have at the beginning of the presentation like an example when in the design process the knowledge or the product of the static protection system comes into play. Because for me at least it was not totally clear what's the static protection system and then what's like what's the then you have the static solid state circuit breakers of course and then you have the tool. So Maybe illustrate it with an example.

1:30:59 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, exactly. Thank you. I think this is also guiding the answers why it's so. The adoption will do.

1:31:11 - Carlos Castro
One thing that you also have to take in consideration is what you consider the spread, the widespread, the widespread. If it's for investment, purposes is one thing. If it's for the general public, it's another.

1:31:29 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, yes. Yeah, here we meant to the general public to be already, like, deployed and being used. Yeah, this is a question that we have to work out for the other versions. Because it's, I also think we have very big, very big time spans for the, yeah, semiconductor, It's sooner and less spread. 2030. It would be until 2030 that we will have all these solutions. For the design tool is also something I would expect because it's being developed. There are already solutions as we saw. There are already solutions being developed. So I think this would be These results are more or less expected. Okay, the last one is about the devices and tools. Animals.

1:33:42 - Lucas Pereira
Thank you.

1:34:07 - Lucas Pereira
I'm missing one answer.

1:34:13 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, here it's tradition measurement device. I think it's more or less suspected this technology exists before 2030.

1:34:40 - Lucas Pereira
converters is also before 2030.

1:34:47 - Lucas Pereira
Everything here is more or less...

1:34:51 - Andrii Chub
All those technologies are there, it's just a question of control system within them. I mean we already have all the technologies we need actually for that. I already wrote in one of the reviews that my personal opinion will lack awareness. Technology is there, and we need to connect somehow.

1:35:11 - Lucas Pereira
It's about controlling, control.

1:35:14 - Andrii Chub
Interoperability also, but we have current OS and other guys working that.

1:35:20 - Lucas Pereira
It's a very interesting point. Okay.

1:35:27 - Lucas Pereira
So this is just one question, which is what do you think would be the barriers for this one spread adoption? I think we already talked about the costs, and like I said, most of them are there. It's about use, the control, and interoperability, and having the actual use cases that we can use these technologies.

1:35:55 - Andrii Chub
Yeah, also I think we are lacking demo. I've been speaking with Ahmad from Schneider. He told us that for every demo we build in Europe, Chinese build 100 demos. I think this year will come to China much faster than to Europe because of this.

1:36:12 - Lucas Pereira
In Europe, it will be faster.

1:36:15 - Andrii Chub
No, no, in China, because they build 100 times more demos.

1:36:19 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, I think it's more or less almost everything. But that's a good point, because demos was also one of the things, one of the challenges, the lack of demos. Actually use cases and seeing what would be an interesting use case. Okay, so I think we have some answers for the widespread adoption, which is standards, having more demos. I don't know if there's something else that we want to add here.

1:36:51 - Andrii Chub
What about standards? I would say that I don't really see it's a long-term problem because all of us know that currently there are standards in development. It's just kind of time when they're coming because they're being cooked. Some of them more actively, especially where China is involved, some of them slower where they're not. Because China, whenever they're involved in standards, they put immense work power to every standard they're involved in. Like you need some simulation results to make decisions. They took 30 students, tomorrow you have 30 simulations, 30 reports. You can make a very fast decision. In Europe, it will take one guy who will be simulating one month and then maybe we'll get decision data. It's a different approach to things but at least this is what I got from my connections and I see what is happening right now. But long story short it is happening and we just need to wait.

1:37:46 - Katharina Hetzenecker
I think that increasing the renewables especially photovoltaic power plants that can be easily connected for example, within buildings via DC will positively support the adoption of these solutions.

1:38:07 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, exactly. For example, for buildings it seems like, because the DC technologies are already there, buildings, the PVs, the EV chargers.

1:38:18 - Andrii Chub
Same with factories, exactly the same situation, just factories is more a part so they're already happening. With this in-house, people will be more anxious, I would say. Actually, when you put different technologies, it also really depends on what application we are speaking about. Is it data center? Is it ports? And so the roadmap would be really different, I guess.

1:38:44 - Lucas Pereira
This is, I think, I'm very curious to see the answers when we look, when we do this for the specific demos. It will be very interesting. Okay so this is the last question on that we have to go through all the technologies. So this one is what if there's an issue and we don't have this technology anytime soon what would be the what we think would be the the risk that this Solution would carry through the deployments of the DC systems and DC solutions Okay, so I don't know availability is like we don't have the materials we have a war or something that we don't have like happen with the Microchips in a few years back and the GPUs this will be this type of question we are making The same we will go through the three categories of technology technologies.

1:40:20 - Lucas Pereira
Then we will ask for your feedback on the session also. So I will postpone our week. I will try to postpone our weekly meeting for this task for next week. That we have some time to analyze the results, but we would also like your feedback on the type of questions we are making. If this is taking too long, all this kind of feedback will be very welcome from you afterwards. Okay, we have nine now, seems we're only missing one. Okay, so far, The DC cables is okay. This is also interesting because we have a tie here Between moderate and critical I Answered critical in my case No I Put moderate, but you know I think that one of the reasons I put it is because you put

1:41:41 - Andrii Chub
smart and sustainable because for example we also can come by not smart or non-sustainable cables and we can still implement our systems that's why I put that if we have non-sustainable cables we can still build that's why the risk

1:41:57 - Lucas Pereira
is not so high of course it is better but it's not a risk better is not a risk okay so now considering the projects what do you think we should frame it as smart and the question is smart and sustainable or we should make it just cables? Because it's the solutions we are developing in the project.

1:42:19 - Andrii Chub
Yeah, yeah, because many people would not really understand what this means, but this is becoming to definitions at the beginning, because many people already use some DC cables, just probably they are pretty bad for nature, but people don't think about that they have way too many problems implementing DC.

1:42:36 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Exactly.

1:42:40 - Baros, Dimitrios
I do agree with Andrii because I put also moderate due to the sustainable and smart so if you can't find the solution without without being smart or sustainable it's also a solution yeah yeah I think this is something that

1:43:00 - Andrii Chub
will be pushed by regulations because you know I also when you asked about the years I put it also further because think that there will be at some point regulations related to cables AC as well as DC in my opinion and at that point we will be pushed to use more smart and sustainable cables but before people are pushed they rarely even think about that this is why we need the regulations I think.

1:43:22 - Lina RUIZ
Interesting that we are getting regulation. The point is more than the sentence explained here you know it's about DC a specific specific cable for DC installation? Probably, I don't know if yeah, a question of the sentence, because the – yeah, the product or the solution behind is because it's focused on DC-specific installation. So, yeah, according to some requirement that we need to implement. I mentioned before the inter-tripping wire and according to different sources connected and so on. So, yeah, the point is not smart and this is terrible yeah even if you know it's something that we put in value also but it's the starting point for me.

1:44:14 - Andrii Chub
Yeah but you know part of the problem of this you know I'm a current OS guy but people in this industry don't think much about intertripping wire and for them this doesn't matter as much and this is again becomes somewhat specific to which system you're really for Okay, great.

1:44:37 - Lucas Pereira
So the next is connectors, then it's critical. Most of the answers, I think it's self-explanatory, right? Okay, so the next This is the protections.

1:45:33 - Lucas Pereira
I see. I have five answers. You I have but 10 we are only having 9. Okay, so for the static protection system it's very critical. I understand why, but we should clarify better what we mean. By this tool.

1:46:35 - Lucas Pereira
The design tool is moderate and critical. It's interesting that we have the two options. I don't know if someone wants to add something here.

1:46:51 - Andrii Chub
I guess if you don't have tool, you can still design using experts. Just easier and faster, so it's not like it's an obstacle, it's rather a complication, I guess.

1:47:03 - Lucas Pereira
This was my answer. I answered moderate based on that, even if it's not going to be a game stopper, we will still do it if we don't have the tools. I don't know if someone that answered critical has a different opinion. I'd like to. Okay.

1:47:33 - Lucas Pereira
The semiconductor circuit breaker, which is also very particular and aligned with the answer from the previous solution. So I see a pattern on the importance of the this part of the protections are normally very critical. Okay. For the last, the last Thank you. Parts.

1:48:51 - Lucas Pereira
I have all the answers. So far the DC measurement device is moderate.

1:49:13 - Lucas Pereira
think it's aligned with also be able to we won't need a lot of them like Andrii was saying so we will still be able to have frankly if I don't have this measurement device I will just design one and measure DC frankly speaking yes also true it's something that Okay, great. So the next one is the DC-DC converter. I think, yeah, critical and very critical. Should explain also better what is the difference between critical and very critical. My assumption is that without this it's very hard to have the systems working right, if we don't have this technology.

1:50:19 - Andrii Chub
I find hard to believe the situation.

1:50:21 - Lucas Pereira
So it's a very good point, it's a very It's very hard that it goes scarce and that we don't have enough materials to.

1:50:39 - Lucas Pereira
Good point. The other one is the LV. Very aligned, the answer. I don't know if you would say the same for this, Andrii, compared to the DC-DC converter?

1:50:56 - Andrii Chub
I mean, we have a low voltage frequency converter. All over the industry, frankly speaking, which is not far away from, especially if it's active braking. So technology is there, solutions are there, and then the smart guys will just sit and change control. This is like, so once we did a project together with Wacom from Finland, where they took a frequency converter and made a PV hybrid inverter out of it, just by changing software.

1:51:27 - Lucas Pereira
Yes, I think it's something that we can. We will figure it out in the end if we have an issue with it.

1:51:34 - Andrii Chub
I mean, what we could see, in my opinion, we could see some shortage of silicon that comes and goes in waves because of scale up of different technologies, AI, you know, when an industry start to compete for silicon. But it's an industry wide. You remember when it took one year to order a vehicle without any electronics inside it, to if you want some nice features and I think this would be the bigger obstacle overall to any industries dependent on semiconductors because currently we see even further reduction in pv module costs and there could be a point at which as I told this always goes in waves there is a wave of shortage chinese build a lot of silicon factories and shortage goes away then we already saw two times I am embracing for certain time buying more transistor in stock.

1:52:27 - Lucas Pereira
Great. Thank you. The design tool is moderate. I think it's the same as for the other. It's important but we will still rely on expertise and we will still be able to develop the solutions. It's more about the materials and at some point we will have the designs ready in our heads and you don't have to actually be designing them all over.

1:53:00 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, so this is just an open-ended question, so which you think would be the conditions that could reduce the risk for this technology, especially for the converters where the that we saw more risk. You think it's just a marketing, it's a fluctuation? I wouldn't say stocking up would be an answer or planning to reduce the risks of shortage of some of this technology.

1:53:35 - Andrii Chub
If we talk about real manufacturing, in real manufacturing there are this ERP and MRP like material resource planning and stuff like that. Companies don't really pile up stuff, at least the ones that are reasonable. They plan deliveries at common time. I had a course once on this from a guy who was actually in charge of a factory. He told that his job as a head of the factory is to minimize the amount of stuff in stock, otherwise you are getting to be overleveraged.

1:54:10 - Andrii Chub
with your stock, basically.

1:54:15 - Andrii Chub
We can tell them to pile up, but...

1:54:20 - Lucas Pereira
It won't be the answer, right? It's more of a thing that we should be prepared to happen.

1:54:31 - Lucas Pereira
And it happens. Because we should be expecting this, like you said. It comes in two waves.

1:54:41 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, so this one is we can go to be talking a lot If there's something from a technical point of view is there still so we talk that there's a lot of technology already available From a technical point of view which breakthroughs would be needed. I think that the one under imagine is the control system more advanced control systems.

1:55:08 - Andrii Chub
But I don't think it's a breakthrough, to be honest. In my opinion, it's evolutionary development.

1:55:17 - Ceballos Recio, Salvador
Maybe I would like to add something here. Again, I don't know if it is a breakthrough, it is a barrier, but I think that we haven't discussed here maybe enough about the compatibility and interoperability. I will try to explain. A Suppose that in the future, we're going to have this disease, right in this in this big in this big disease. It's not going to be the components. The equipment is not going to be supply. Yes, but one manufacturer, but it's going to supply, but many manufacturers are in the AC, right? In order to make the solution cost competitive and so on a from my point of view. There is a risk or a barrier between the different elements between the different active elements. Let's say converters and protections. I'm not going to talk about protections because I don't know anything about protection, but converters if there are some interoperability issues in between converters that leads to Oscillations. This is this is something that we need to. This is something that needs to be overcome. This is already a concern in ACC. Systems. We have penetration of power electronics and maybe for these systems, it's going to be a little bit easier to address, but I think it is still there. This thing, it is still there. In any case, this is my perception.

1:56:45 - Lucas Pereira
Yeah, this is all what this is about the perceptions. Okay. I think it's a very Okay.

1:56:59 - Lucas Pereira
Okay, so the next, last question is, so we talked a lot about tools. Do we discuss the tools that we have in our projects? I wonder if you, if there are some tools that you have thought about and you think another project to explore which So it's a lot. We have a lot. We've covered a lot of ground. Maybe it's hard to find five solutions that you think could also be implemented.

1:57:47 - Lucas Pereira
I think you have covered. Should we have more? Tools to design more software so we have more, like, appliances, more renewable solutions. Do you think there's something that would really help in this, especially in our demos? I can't think about anything. I know it's hard because the project is touching most of the things.

1:58:31 - Andrii Chub
I feel that, yes, one of the important solutions that we are developing now, I'm not sure how far we can go with that, is this EMS. Because energy management that is tailored for DC, this is, I feel, a critical point over Because you can develop a lot of different equipment, but we need something to interconnect. And this is also a solution of interoperability at some point. If we can have some common ground on the EMS side, then we can at least implement things.

1:59:07 - Lucas Pereira
What about simulation tools? We are developing a tool for simulating microgrids.

1:59:17 - Andrii Chub
Hard to comment. Simulation guy.

1:59:19 - Lucas Pereira
We have all these digital twins also we're trying to develop digital twins but even the EMS is something we have in the project we did it it's it's interesting because it's one of the tools we are actually developing in the project okay but yeah it's very hard because we have a lot of tools so probably Maybe it would be easier for this question if we have something already here or make this question earlier because it's a lot. Okay.

1:59:59 - Unidentified Speaker
Okay.

2:00:00 - Lucas Pereira
So I don't know if there's something else you want to add. So there's only two more questions. If you want to add something else about the project, about the process, so you can also give this after the session this feedback it's very welcome we're already taking some notes on how we will make this better at least faster okay the last question is and this is important because since most of the questions are on a Likert scale we would like you to rank your expertise, level of expertise. If you can tell us, then we will use this to calibrate the answers. Okay, so this is the expertise level question on each of the three categories. Is.

2:02:18 - Lucas Pereira
So this is, we won't be discussing this. This is just to use for, to calibrate the answers afterwards, moderate on materials. I will ask the other participants to fill this offline. This is an important part. For protections, we have more spreads example, but we will add the other participants and I think won't be this spread and finally for devices and tools is from high to moderate again this is not explanatory because we're missing a few participants that were with us in the beginning and we have to ask them to to answer this. Okay this is just to conclude I don't know so thank you so like I said this is a pilot run we have to for the other session. I think we will remove some questions. My impression is that this is too long. I would ask you if you have an opinion about the whole process. If you think we should make it shorter probably, less questions and engage in more discussions. This is my perception that maybe less tools and more in-depth discussion would be better. I don't know if some of you. Yes, I think you agree, because yeah, we can make this our we are aiming at one and a half hours to do everything and we spent OK, we are here for two hours. But since we have less participants, this is why it's the end it went faster. But OK, so we will back and in the next meeting, we will be presenting some alternatives such that we can fine tune this. Okay. If there's nothing else, I would just like to say again, thank you for being here. It's very important because I think we have very interesting discussions and it's going to be, like I said, this will be part of the deliverable. This is not This is not strong, let's go to the desk so we will actually do something with these results. Okay, thank you very much again. I'll send you some results once we start analyzing them. Okay, thanks. Thank you very much. Bye. Thank you. Thank you very much.